sales pitch : how to craft a story to stand out and win

Part 1:

I work with the founders and CEOs of
technology companies, many of whom
have a background in engineering and
tech. The most common complaint I get
from these people is that “selling is hard!”

In marketing, we make a distinction between “considered” and
“unconsidered” purchases. Typically, an unconsidered purchase is easier to
make than a considered purchase.
An unconsidered purchase is something you buy without much planning or
forethought. This includes everyday consumer products like toothpaste, a
sandwich for lunch, or a pack of gum. You don’t do much, if any, research
ahead of time. Yes, you might compare your options, but mainly you limit
your choices to whatever is in front of you at that moment. The stakes for
an unconsidered purchase are low. If you make a poor choice you’re
unhappy with later, it’s not a big deal—you will just be sure not to buy it
again.
Considered purchases take more time and effort because there are
potentially negative consequences if you make a poor choice. Buying a
house or purchasing life insurance are examples of considered purchases
where the impact of making a bad choice is high. A poor decision could cost
you and your family an incredible amount of money. There are many
options to choose from and buyers will spend some time educating
themselves on what choices are available. In a considered purchase, there
are often other people impacted by the decision who might be involved in
the purchase process, making it even harder and more time-consuming to
make a final decision.

Most technology purchased by businesses, from accounting software to
project management tools, are highly considered purchases. The stakes are
high in a business purchase. Often, the purchase must be justified to a
manager who might question your competence if you make a bad
recommendation. Users might be upset if your newly selected product is
difficult to use. Bad technology could impact the performance of the
business and, in extreme cases, cost the purchaser their job. In short, buying
software for a business is nothing like buying a new pair of shoes.
We dramatically underestimate how difficult it is to make a considered
purchase decision. As sellers, we are often so preoccupied with how
difficult it is to sell a product that we completely lose sight of how buyers
are feeling during the purchase process. We are so close to our own
offerings that we assume they are easy to understand and to decide to
purchase, but frequently this is not the case. Before I give you a businessto-
business (B2B) technology example, let me give you a non-technology
example of a purchase process that I assumed would be easy and turned out
to be frustratingly difficult.




“Customers, it turns
out, are much less
worried about missing
out than they are
about messing up.”
Matthew Dixon & Ted McKenna

Buyers Want a Guide
What happened there? Was the salesperson giving me a pushy hard sell on a
toilet? No. Was the salesperson giving me a walkthrough of every feature a
toilet could have? Nope. What he did was give me a way to categorize all of
my options so I could make an informed choice for myself based on what
was most important to me. He was acting like a knowledgeable guide, and
in doing so, he taught me how to confidently make a purchase.

The Sales Rep Isn’t Helping
the Buyer Make a Decision
Eventually, Joey narrows down the choices to a shortlist of vendors. He
might sign up for free versions or trials for each of the vendors on his list,
but he’s still not sure yet exactly what he needs, so he sets up sales
appointments with each vendor. Each meeting turns out to be exactly the
same. The call starts with the sales rep asking questions about Joey’s
company and its requirements for accounting software. Joey answers as best
he can, but the truth is, he isn’t entirely sure his list of requirements is
correct or complete. The rep then switches gears and gives Joey a demo of
the product. Joey feels like he has been invited to step into a wind tunnel of
features. He doesn’t understand many of them, but all seem potentially
important for his company. By the end of the product walkthrough, Joey’s
feeling of overwhelm is peaking.
The Buyer Is Nervous
Because the Stakes Are High
Joey knows he is going to have to get IT and a few end users involved at
some point before he can make a recommendation to Janet, and he’s
worried a poor choice might make him look stupid. If the product isn’t a
great fit, the company might be impacted, and that’s not good. Joey might
get passed over for his next promotion or, worse, fired.

The Safest Choice Is the Easiest Choice
If you’re a buyer like Joey, what’s the easiest decision to make at this point?
The easiest decision would be to go back to Janet and recommend the
company sticks with the current solution. Hey, it’s been working fine for
years, it should be okay for a couple more, and besides, there is that audit to
deal with right now. Maybe next year someone can look into getting new
software. “Someone,” he thinks, “that isn’t me.” So, the company does
nothing.

The easiest, 
safest purchase 
decision is often 
no decision. 

“Do Nothing” Is Your Fiercest Competitor
You might believe that the decision to do nothing happens infrequently, but
you would be mistaken. In their 2022 book, The JOLT Effect: How High
Performers Overcome Customer Indecision, Matthew Dixon and Ted
McKenna reveal that between 40 and 60 percent of purchase processes end
in no decision. Interestingly, most of the time, this doesn’t mean that the
buyer has decided their current solution is better than the alternatives.
Instead, the buyer doesn’t feel confident they have the information needed
to make an informed choice. The worry that they could make a costly
mistake leads them to dropping out of the purchase process completely.
Customers can’t figure out how they should evaluate and buy solutions, so
they simply don’t buy anything.

Not making a purchase at all is an incredibly attractive option for a buyer
who is worried about making a poor choice. A buyer won’t get in trouble
for simply suggesting the company keep doing what they are doing. Hey,
it’s not perfect, but it’s been working more or less okay for years. Why not
wait and hang on for another year (or another, or another after that)?
Nobody has to go through the pain of training and learning a new system.
Nobody gets mad because the new system didn’t do what was promised.
Moving away from a solution that kinda, sorta does the job takes more than
effort—it also takes courage. As vendors, we underestimate the pull of “no
decision” at our peril.

It’s also important to understand that when a customer fails to make a
decision, this doesn’t always signal a strong preference for their current
solution. No decision is as likely to be a vote against change as it is a vote
for the status quo. As a vendor, you always need to position against the
buyer’s status quo, even if there are other vendors to worry about on the
customer’s shortlist. Part of positioning against the status quo is making the

case for change.
Now more than ever, buyers have access to mountains of information—
from vendors, review sites, and analysts—but they struggle to make sense
of it. It is a mistake to assume that because such information exists, buyers
no longer need any help to make a purchase decision. The effort to make
sense of that information is massive. Buyers are drowning in information
but starved for market insight. Prospects who can’t confidently make a
choice between options will generally take the lowest risk option, which is
to simply do nothing and keep using the status quo.
Emotions in B2B Selling
Consumer marketers talk a lot about the role of emotions in the purchase
process. Many of the personal purchases we make are driven by our
feelings and desires related to self-worth, acceptance, status, love, and good
old-fashioned sex. Emotions matter in business purchases, too, but the types
of emotions that drive purchase behaviors are often different. Fear is the
granddaddy of B2B emotions. Fear of failure. Fear of the repercussions of
making a poor decision. Fear of looking stupid. Fear of getting fired. In a
sales situation, invoking feelings like trust and confidence can go a long
way toward helping buyers overcome their fear. Later in the book, I will
talk more about how you can build trust and confidence in your buyer.

What Do
Customers
Want from
Vendors?

So, what should your role be
in helping your customers make
purchase decisions?
Many of the technology start-ups I work with assume that helping customers
buy isn’t really their job as vendors. Their job is to sell their product. They
assume that customers can and will do their own research, figure out their
purchase criteria, make a shortlist, evaluate the options, and choose a
product to purchase. They believe the vendor’s job is to understand
customers’ problems and show how their solution solves them. Many
companies are convinced that buyers don’t want to hear their opinions on
how customers should make a purchase decision. And besides, why would
the customer believe them?
But as it turns out, customers want more from vendors than they generally
give them. In the groundbreaking 2011 book The Challenger Sale, authors
Matthew Dixon and Brent Adamson reveal that buyers placed the most value
on a sales rep’s teaching skills. They found that the key characteristics of a
world-class sales experience all related to the sales rep’s ability to help
customers figure out how to make an informed purchase. Research tells us
that in a sales call, buyers expect sellers to help them understand their
options. Buyers would like vendors to help them understand the trade-offs
between different approaches to solving their problem. They want to
understand potential pitfalls and how to avoid them. Buyers are looking for
ways to understand what choices are available to them and how they should
choose between them. This stands in stark contrast to what many companies
are currently communicating across marketing and sales.

Often, we simply aren’t giving buyers what they want. Go to most
technology companies’ websites or talk to their sales reps and you won’t
hear anything about the market or competitors. They are talking about the
company and the product in complete isolation. You may be highlighting
what you believe your best features are, but you are leaving it up to the
customer to determine why those features matter and whether or not other
alternatives can accomplish the same thing. Buyers are left doing all the
work to figure out what is important and what isn’t, and how different
vendors stack up for businesses like theirs.

The person leading a B2B purchase process is tasked with making a wellinformed,
low-risk, defensible purchase decision. Vendors tend to assume
the question the prospect wants them to answer is, “Why pick you?” Instead,
the question the customer really wants the vendor to answer is, “Why pick
you over all the alternatives?” If the vendor really wants to answer that latter
question, they need to go beyond talking about their product and its features
in isolation.

Buyers Are Experts in Pain,
Vendors Are Experts in Solutions
Marketing and salespeople are often taught that customers have all the
answers. Marketers are taught that any good marketing effort starts with
customer research. Salespeople are taught that a good sales call starts with
asking the customer questions about their situation, pain points, and goals

Knowing your customers is vitally important. You need to deeply understand
what motivates them, and the jobs they need to accomplish, and you can
understand that only by talking to your customers because they are experts in
their pain. After a purchase, customers can tell you a lot about how they are
using your product and what they love and hate about your solution.
Customers can also tell you what other solutions they evaluated and, if you
are good at pulling this out of them, why they chose you.
But customers don’t understand the market the way you do. As vendors
operating in this solution space, you are more knowledgeable about what is
possible and what isn’t. You understand the underlying technology, and what
its potential is, much better than your prospects do.
Understanding the solution space in which you operate is your business.
Every day, everyone in the company is thinking and learning about and
working on this. Customers are focused on their own businesses, and they
don’t start thinking about your market until they are in a purchase process.
And often the person in charge of making a purchase recommendation has
never purchased a product like yours before.

Why a features-only pitch for Help Scout doesn’t work. Many SaaS
(software as a service) businesses like Help Scout would merely give a
prospect a tour of their features. This product walkthrough–style demo
would simply sound like a tour of Help Scout’s features—show the shared
inbox interface, show how multiple inboxes are set up, show the integrated
knowledge base, show how to avoid duplicate replies, show automated
workflows, show integrations with other apps, etc. Would this demo help a
customer make a purchase decision? No, it wouldn’t. Many of these features
seem to overlap with either a shared inbox or traditional help desk software.
How is Help Scout really different, and what value can it deliver that other
solutions can’t? The feature pitch doesn’t answer these questions.

What would a sales pitch that helps customers buy look like? Instead of a
traditional product walkthrough, Help Scout helps customers understand
their point of view on the market and how their approach is different from
the alternatives. It then moves to a demo focused on the value that only they
can deliver. The conversation goes something like this:
Rep: We’ve seen with the digital brands we work with that customer service
is an effective way to build brand loyalty and drive growth. Great service
can decrease customer acquisition costs and drive customer referrals.
Prospect: We certainly think great service is important for our business.
Rep: We’ve seen companies like yours start with a shared inbox, which is
easy for service folks to use. Eventually, however, the business grows, and
they start looking for more scalable support features like workflows and
assignments. How have you folks been handling support so far?
Prospect: We use a shared inbox today, but we have a hard time handling the
volume of requests we get, so we are looking for something more scalable.
Rep: Many of our customers will then look at traditional help desk software.
Those solutions have advanced features, but they do have some drawbacks.
They’re difficult to use compared to a shared inbox, but more importantly, the products were designed to reduce support costs by driving customers to
low-cost channels and reducing the number of support tickets. They do this
at the expense of delivering a great customer experience.
Prospect: We’re worried about how hard it will be to get our service reps up
to speed with a help desk package. We certainly want to ensure we are
giving customers a great experience.
Rep: We believe the perfect customer service solution for companies like
yours would be as easy to use as a shared inbox, have the advanced features
you need so you don’t grow out of it, and be highly focused on delivering an
amazing customer service experience. Would you agree with that?
Prospect: That’s what we are looking for.
Rep: Great, let me show you how Help Scout does this.
At this point, the rep moves to a demo that is organized around their key
value points:
An easy-to-use inbox experience: showing the key points of the user
interface (UI)
*
Advanced support features you won’t outgrow: showing workflows,
assignments, etc.
•
Delivering a great customer experience—customer chooses their preferred
channel, customers are never assigned a ticket number, etc.

Unlike a traditional product walkthrough, this pitch makes it perfectly clear
how Help Scout is different and better than the alternatives. It gives
customers a view of the entire market and helps them understand where Help
Scout fits. It also allows sales to show the product but keeps the focus on the
value only they can deliver.


PART TWO

Sales Pitch Principles

Before we look at how to structure a
sales pitch, let’s go over what needs to
happen before and during a first sales
call with a prospect.

These key elements are qualification,
discovery, product demonstrations, and differentiated value.

Qualification
The process of qualification is making sure your prospect is a potential
good fit for your offering. Qualification is important because you don’t
want to waste critical sales resources (not to mention the customer’s time!)
pitching a product to a company that isn’t a fit for what you do.
Qualification criteria can be a range of things depending on your product
and the way you sell. Criteria could include information like company size
or revenue, whether there is a technical fit for your solution, and the
company’s budget, for example.

For most companies selling to businesses, qualification happens before the
buyer gets to a first true sales meeting. Some companies will do this online
with a questionnaire or form, but more often, business development reps
(BDRs) will have a short call with a prospect to qualify them, and only
those who meet the qualification criteria will be booked for a first call with
a sales rep.
The sales pitch is the story you tell in that first call, so the prospect you are
talking to should already be qualified. If your sales process doesn’t include
a qualification step before a first call, you will need to work qualification
questions into your discovery conversation.

Discovery
Discovery usually happens in a first sales call. Done well, discovery is a
conversation during which the buyer teaches the seller about their pain,
problems, and situation, but the seller is also teaching the buyer about their
point of view on problems and solutions in the space.
A successful discovery conversation aligns buyers and sellers on the true
nature of the problem, what to consider when evaluating solutions, and the
value a perfect solution should deliver. That means a good sales pitch needs
to accommodate space for a rep to have a discovery conversation with a
prospect.

Product Demonstrations
I have never encountered a prospect who wants to be “sold” to. Nobody
wants to be on the receiving end of pushy, high-pressure tactics that try to
force them into making a decision they aren’t comfortable with. So I
strongly believe that when a prospect comes to your site and clicks the
button that says, “Book a demo,” what they crave most is knowledge that
spans both the market and your product. Prospects want to understand how
to make a good choice that doesn’t get them fired. Yes, they want to see the
product, but they also want insight to help them make sense of what they
are looking at.
Many, but not all, companies do a product demonstration in a first call with
a customer. Often, prospects book the sales meeting explicitly because they
want to see a demo and get a feel for the experience your product delivers.
In some cases, demonstrating how your product works is the best way to
communicate the value of what it does.

There are various structures for product demos. The most used one I’ve
seen is a “product walkthrough.” This is simply a guided tour of the key
functionality of the product. I’ve seen other variations, including a “day in
the life” demo that shows how a user would complete typical tasks. Some
companies prefer to do a highly customized demo, tailored to what they
believe the customer wants to see.

When You Do a Product Demo,
Always Show Your Best

No matter what format you choose for your product demonstration, a first
call should show customers the best of what you can do, whether or not
they requested to see what you would consider your best capabilities. As I
showed earlier, buyers aren’t always exactly sure what their purchase
criteria should be. A first demo is a chance to firmly position yourself in the
prospect’s mind by showing what makes your product different and better
than the alternatives in general.

It is impossible to
differentiate yourself
without addressing
the alternatives.
For example, I worked at a company that sold a customer relationship
management (CRM) solution for investment banks, and we had a unique
killer feature that delivered value that investment bankers loved. Did any of
our prospects ask to see that capability in a qualification call? Never. They
didn’t know it was even possible. Did we show it to every customer
anyway? You bet we did, and it was the main reason we won business.

If You Customize Your Demo,
Do It in a Second Call
Some companies want to do a customized demo. In my opinion, that can
generally come in a second meeting. It’s difficult to customize a demo until
after you’ve done discovery, and showing a completely customized demo in
the first meeting misses an opportunity to show prospects what you can do,
beyond what they already think they need. A custom demo can come in a
follow-up meeting if that makes sense.

You Can Skip a Demo in Some Instances
I also think it’s fine to skip doing a demo in a first sales call. Sometimes,
customers have already done a trial or used a free version of the product
and they simply don’t need to see it. Other times, there simply isn’t much
value in showing the product in isolation. For example, I worked at a
company that sold databases and we rarely demoed the product (hey, if
you’ve seen one SQL query, you’ve seen them all). Instead, we focused on
ensuring that our prospects conceptually understood the capabilities that
enabled us to deliver unique business value.

Differentiated Value
Value, and more importantly differentiated value, is at the core of great
sales and marketing. Yet, of all the concepts in marketing and sales, value is
probably the least understood. More than anything else you might learn in
this book, if you learn that a great sales pitch should be oriented around
your differentiated value, I guarantee you will sell more.
Many of us working in technology come from a technical background, and
it isn’t surprising that most start-ups will naturally focus on features in their
sales and marketing. It’s our comfort zone. But as much as we love features,
what really matters for customers is the business value they get from those
features.
For many features of B2B products, you cannot assume that customers can
make the leap from features to why the features matter. Value is the answer
to the question, “So what?”

•
Your database supports advanced usage metrics, including query runs. So
what? So support personnel can better assist customers.
•
Your CRM automatically sends status updates to managers. So what? So
your sales reps can spend less time building reports and more time selling.
•
Your accounting system supports adding an expiration date on inventory
items. So what? So you can ensure you never sell an expired item and can
easily know when to apply discounts to items that expire soon.

It may be true, for example, that your product saves
time for companies. But what if all your competitors also help companies
save time? Suddenly, your value is interesting but not a reason to buy.
Exposing your differentiated value, and helping a prospect understand why
it is important for them, is the key to winning business. A great sales pitch
tells the story of the value that only your product can deliver and why that
value is very important to a certain kind of buyer. It is the answer to the
question, “Why pick us over the alternatives?”

You Can’t Differentiate Yourself
without Addressing the Alternatives
You cannot teach customers your differentiated value and why it matters
without talking about the alternatives in the market. A good sales pitch
addresses the alternatives and helps customers understand how to categorize
them, and what their strengths and weaknesses are for different types of
buyers.
----

Four Common
Approaches to
Storytelling
in a Sales Pitch

If you believe that your job as a
vendor is to teach customers how
to confidently make a purchase
decision, then how do you do that?

Smart businesses tell a wide range of stories for different audiences and to
sell different things.
For example, many companies have an “employer” story designed to help
prospective employees decide if they should join the company. This story is
often focused on the company’s values and mission.
If a company is raising money, they will use an investor pitch to help
investors understand why they are a good investment. This story is often
focused on the company vision and the business they will be in five or ten
years in the future.
And then there is the sales pitch that sells a product or service. Unlike the
investor pitch, which is all about the future, an effective sales pitch is firmly
oriented in the present. This is the story that companies tell prospects to
answer the question, “Why choose us over the alternatives you could
choose today?”

Naturally, these different sales stories are also structured differently. Most
sales and marketing teams use one of four distinct approaches to craft a
narrative or pitch:
1
The product walkthrough
2
The problem/solution pitch
3
The vision narrative
4
The hero’s journey

The Product Walkthrough
I have spent most of my career running marketing teams at technology
start-ups. In almost every case, the structure the sales team used in a first
sales meeting was essentially a product walkthrough. Some walkthroughs
simply click through each menu item and explain what it does. Others
describe how a user would accomplish certain tasks. Some do a more
customized walkthrough based on what they know about the prospect.
When Does It Work Best?
This style of narrative works best when the buyer is highly educated or the
solution they are using now is very similar to what you sell. Buyers in this
situation will be better able to translate the features they are shown into
business value.

What’s the Downside?
It is focused on features, not value. Prospects don’t necessarily understand
why they should care about particular features, so they may not be able to
figure out why those features are important for their business.

“Identify stories
that pique buyers’
curiosity and move
them to action.”
Jill Konrath

You spend too much time on capabilities that are not differentiating. Most
product walkthroughs try to show everything they can do without
highlighting what is differentiated. Is the way you log in innovative? Is how
you set up an account any different from the alternatives? What value is
there in showing that? The product walkthrough generally does a poor job
of answering the question, “Why pick you over the alternatives?”

The product walkthrough is all about your solution and leaves no room to
discuss the market. The product walkthrough does not accomplish what
most B2B buyers want: a way to understand all the alternatives so they can
confidently make the right choice for their business. To confidently choose
you, buyers need to understand why the alternatives can’t meet their needs
better.
The Problem/Solution Pitch
The problem/solution pitch is generally very similar to the product
walkthrough pitch with bit of setup before you jump into the demo. In these
pitches, you describe “the problem” the customer has and then position
your product as “the solution” to that problem, before following up with a
demo that shows how you deliver the solution.

When Does It Work Best?
Like the product walkthrough, this style of narrative works best when the
buyer is highly educated and can translate the features they are shown into
business value. This style of pitch is also more effective when the only
competitor in the market is the status quo. It is dramatically less effective
when there are many alternatives for the prospect to consider.
What’s the Downside?
Your competitors define the problem the same way you do. You have
identified that folks looking for accounting software need a fast, easy way
to do accounting. That’s obvious, and all your competitors also solve that
problem. There is nothing in this pitch style that gives you a way to
highlight your differentiated value and answer the question, “Why pick you
over the alternatives?”
It is focused on features, not your differentiated value. The
problem/solution pitch tends to turn into a feature walkthrough once the
problem has been defined. There is no focus on the value you can deliver
that the other alternatives cannot.

The Vision Narrative
In technology companies that are raising money, the CEO will have a
narrative that is used to pitch the company to investors. This narrative
structure is often formed around describing the current approach to a
particular problem (the tired and crappy “old way”), and then painting a
picture of an alternative approach (the amazing and shiny “new way”) that,
if current trends continue, will be a much better way to do things in the
future. The vision narrative is less about the current state of the product and
more about its future state and the company’s strategy to get there.

“You can’t sell
anything if
you can’t
tell anything.”
Beth Comstock

When Does It Work Best?
The vision narrative works best when pitching investors. For investors, the
vision pitch does a good job of explaining where the company is going and
why you are a good potential investment.
What’s the Downside?
It ignores competitors beyond the status quo. For most solutions, there are
many alternatives a customer might consider. Attempting to position a wide
range of alternatives as “the old way” simply doesn’t work when there are
competing “new ways” to consider, as well as alternatives that cannot be
credibly classified as simply “old” or “new.”
The vision narrative gives buyers yet another reason to delay a decision.
Even if you successfully sell the vision, you risk giving the buyer a reason
to delay a purchase. There’s no urgency to buy something when it doesn’t
exist yet, not to mention the added risk that you may never deliver on the
vision. Prospects on the receiving end of a vision pitch often respond with,
“Hey, that’s great. Come back next year and pitch this to me when it
exists!”
It isn’t centered on differentiated value. It assumes that “new” is valuable
(and the only value that matters). For B2B buyers, newness isn’t always
obviously valuable. Worse, it can have negative associations—untested,
unreliable, lacking in features, or insecure. The vision narrative is not
oriented around differentiated value—what your solution can do for their
business that no other solution can—which is the core of any good sales
pitch

The Hero’s Journey
The most famous narrative structure for storytelling in general is known as
the “hero’s journey.” The hero’s journey starts with a hero who goes on an
adventure or quest, learns a lesson, uses that knowledge to achieve victory,
and then returns home transformed. This story structure is widely used in
entertainment, so much so that the most common example of this structure
is the plot for the movie Star Wars.

The StoryBrand structure moves
through seven steps: The hero (the customer) has a problem and meets a
guide (you!), who gives the hero a plan and calls them to action. This action
ends in success and helps the hero avoid failure. The thing I like the most is
that this structure makes it completely clear that as a vendor, your role is to
be a guide, helping the hero (the buyer) achieve success and avoid failure.

When Does It Work Best?
The hero’s journey is used when the primary goal is to entertain and engage
your customer through a story. It’s a structure that works well for content
like customer case studies, where your goal is to tell the story of a
customer’s journey from having had a problem, to choosing you to solve
that problem, to experiencing success afterward.

What’s the Downside?
“The plan” is focused on execution, not on how to decide what action to
take. In Miller’s book, the hero (the customer) encounters the guide (you),
who gives them a plan. One of the sample plans provided includes these
three steps: 1) download the software, 2) integrate your database into the
system, and 3) revolutionize your customer interaction. This is the answer
to “How do I get started?,” not a plan to help a customer understand why to
choose you. Prospects need help understanding their options and how to
make a confident decision.
The concept of alternatives is missing. The core of a good sales narrative is
a rubric for helping a customer make choices. The hero’s journey structure
doesn’t focus on the step that a prospect is primarily concerned with in a
sales situation: “How do I confidently choose between seemingly similar
options?”
Although the narrative structures we’ve just explored may serve you well
for recruitment, raising capital, or crafting a customer case study, they
aren’t well suited to a sales situation. So, what should a narrative structure
for selling look like?


The Road
to a Better
Sales Pitch
Structure

Looking at the gaps in the other
storytelling structures can teach us
something about what is needed to
build a great sales pitch.

I inherited a sales pitch deck that had this structure:
1
It started with an “about us” slide that listed the year we were founded, the
current number of employees, and the money we had raised.
2
Following that was a busy slide full of customer logos (affectionately
referred to as “the NASCAR slide”).
3
We then moved to a “problem” slide, which stated the problem our product
was designed to solve. We generally defined this problem at a high level,
exactly the way every one of our competitors defined it.
4
Then came the demo, which was a product feature walkthrough. We showed
the prospect how to log on and get started, walked them through the main
menus, and showed how their common tasks would be completed. Most of
the time was spent here.
5
We wrapped up with a high-level pricing slide.
We never built a sales pitch deck from scratch. We modified pitches that
seemed to have existed since the dawn of time itself. Nobody questioned
the flow or structure of the pitch or the demo. We simply did it the way we
always did it.

What Happens to Positioning When
a Prospect Moves from Marketing to Sales?

As my career progressed, I became a VP of marketing, and I started to
notice that although we obsessed over the story we were telling in our
marketing campaigns and materials, when customers made it to a sales
meeting, there was no storytelling or positioning happening at all. Our
positioning defined how our product was special and different from
anything else in the market, but our sales pitch rarely reflected that
positioning. Once leads got passed to the sales team, they weren’t hearing
that story. Instead, they were hit with a barrage of features and a bit of
information about our company history. This seemed like an incredible
missed opportunity to me, even if I wasn’t sure exactly what to do about it
yet.

Discovering the Magic of
Pitching a Unique Point of View

The most interesting thing to me about the IBM pitch structure was the way
these pitches started. The conversation never began with a discussion about
the company or the product. Instead, it always started with a discussion
about IBM’s point of view on the market. Reps would talk about what IBM
perceived to be important considerations for companies looking at any
solution in the market. They would then discuss how different approaches
to providing a solution stacked up. Reps were doing discovery at this step,
but also giving the customers a big picture of the entire market and teaching
them how to make informed choices. The sales reps were skillfully
positioning our product in the minds of customers, relative to the
competition, and that was winning us deals.

“Stop selling.
Start helping.”
Zig Ziglar

The
Sales Pitch
Structure

The goal of a great sales pitch is to
help customers understand all their
choices, the trade-offs between each,
and when to pick your solution.

That means a great sales pitch should:
1
Help prospects understand the entire market, including other common
alternatives beyond your product and the pros and cons of those alternatives
mapped to their particular situation.
2
Accommodate the salesperson’s need to do in-depth discovery.
3
Help prospects clearly understand your differentiated value versus other
alternatives and why the unique value only you can deliver is critically
important.
4
Accommodate a product demonstration (should you choose to do one) as a
natural part of the narrative flow of the pitch.
5
Include a clear call to action for what the prospect should do next.

 

Figure 1
To accomplish this, I’ve broken the sales pitch structure into two distinct
phases: the setup and the follow-through.
1
The setup focuses on offering your insights about the market, competitive
alternatives, and discovery.
2
The follow-through focuses on your solution for the customer or, more
specifically, on the value that only your product can deliver, including a
demo (if you want one), and ends with a call to action.
At a high level, the sales pitch looks like this (see Figure 1).

The Setup
The setup is where you have a conversation with the prospect about the
market. Specifically, this is when you teach prospects the market context
they need to know to understand the importance of the value only you can
deliver. It makes sense to do this before you talk about your differentiated
value.
The setup consists of three distinct components: Insight, Alternatives, and
The Perfect World.
1
Insight: The insight frames the conversation by starting with what your
experience has taught you about the customer’s situation, problems, and the
solutions in the market. This critically important step points the customer
toward what they need to know to understand why your differentiated value
is important to them.
2
Alternatives: In this step, you discuss what alternative solutions exist in the
market today, and the pros and cons of those alternatives for various
customers. This is a conversational step, and where you will do discovery.
The goal of this step is to help paint a picture of the market for prospects
while simultaneously getting a better understanding of the prospect’s
current situation.
3
The Perfect World: This step outlines the characteristics of a perfect
solution for your target customers. To arrive here, you draw on the
discussion about the alternatives in the previous step, as guided by the
insight introduced in the first step.

The Follow-Through
At this point, your sales pitch will transition from the setup to the followthrough.
The follow-through is focused primarily on exposing the value
only your product can deliver to the prospect. This section has five distinct
components.
1
The Introduction: You introduce the company and the product. This is how
you will navigate the transition from the setup part of the sales pitch.
Usually, this is also the place where you introduce your definition of the
market category you position yourself in.
2
Differentiated Value: In this step, you cover the value that only your
product can deliver for a specific customer and the features that enable that
value, which is often (but not always) done with a demo. This step is the
meatiest part of the sales pitch and where you will likely spend most of
your time in a first call with a prospect.

 
Figure 2
3
Proof: Now you need to show how you can deliver the value you say you
can. This can take the form of case studies, awards, third-party validation,
and other proof points.
4
Objections (optional): This is an optional step in the sales pitch where you
explicitly handle common objection you believe are critical to address
before the end of the meeting. This may range from concerns about how
difficult it is to adopt the solution, integration, or pricing concerns.
5
The Ask: You finish the meeting by recommending a next step for the
Prospect.


Part 3

A Great Sales
Pitch Starts
with Solid
Positioning

A good sales pitch doesn’t begin with
a blank sheet of paper. You need to
gather a distinct set of inputs before
you start. A great sales pitch will be a
story rooted in your positioning.
Before you build a sales pitch, you need to review your positioning. When
you think about your current positioning, you may or may not be happy with
it. But your sales pitch will reflect your positioning, and as my university
coding professor used to say, garbage in, garbage out.

In marketing, positioning defines your differentiated value and the target
buyer for your message. Your sales story should reflect that same narrative,
so it makes sense that you should start with your positioning when
constructing a sales pitch

 

Figure 3
The Five Components of Positioning
1
Competitive Alternatives: These are the alternative ways of solving the
problem in the minds of customers. This could include whatever the status
quo solution is. For B2B technology, that might include things like
Microsoft Excel, manual processes, or “hire an intern to do it.”
2
Unique Capabilities: These are the capabilities of your offering that the
alternatives do not have. They can be traditional features of a product, as
well as capabilities of the company such as professional services offerings or
specialized expertise.
3
Differentiated Value: This is the value your product enables for customers.
This could be something like “helps customers save money by reducing
development costs” or “speeds time to market by streamlining operations.”

4
Best-Fit Customers: This is the definition of a target account that is a good
fit for your product. This usually includes firmographic information—for
example, company size, revenue, number of employees—but it may also
include other characteristics such as: the target account is already a
Microsoft shop, or it has over one hundred gigabytes of internal data to be
analyzed, or it has a distributed development team.
5
Market Category: The market category is the answer to the question, “What
is it?” It’s the context within which you position your product and serves as a
starting point for customers to understand what your product is all about.

How the Positioning
Components Work Together
All these positioning component pieces have a relationship with each other.
In a typical positioning exercise, you work your way through the component
pieces in a particular order.
1
You start with listing the competitive alternatives, or what customers would
do if your solution didn’t exist.
2
Once you have that list, your next question is, “What do we have that the
alternatives do not?” The answers give you a list of differentiated or unique
capabilities.
3
Then you can go down that list and ask, “So what for customers?” Put
another way, “What is the value those capabilities enable for our buyers?”
4
Once you know what your differentiated value is, then you can figure out
who your best-fit customers are. What are the characteristics of a target
account that make them care a lot about the value only you can deliver?
5
In the final step, you identify your best market category. This is the context
you position your product in so that your value is obvious to your target
customers. This is the definition of the market you intend to win.

All these components will be critical inputs to the sales pitch. Let’s look at
an example of how this comes together.

A great sales
pitch starts
with great
positioning.

Preparing Your
Positioning
before Building
a Sales Pitch

Since your positioning is a critical
input, before starting the process to
develop your sales pitch, you will
want to document your positioning.

What Are You Positioning and Pitching?
If you are a single-product company, then the focus of the sales pitch will
be your product. If your company has multiple products, then the focus of
the pitch will depend on your sales process and what you usually try to sell
first to a new account.

Who Is Your Audience?
When you are creating your positioning and building a sales pitch, you need
to consider who you are aiming it at. In a typical B2B purchase decision,
there are usually between five and eight people involved in that decision.
So, do you need different positioning and a different pitch for each of them?
The key is to figure out who is your champion.
In a typical technology purchase, you will encounter people in the
following roles at some point in the purchase process:
•
The Economic Buyer. This is the person who holds the budget and often has
the ultimate approval over whether or not the purchase gets made.
•
The Champion. The economic buyer is not always the person tasked with
figuring out what product to buy. That job is often delegated to a person
who is tasked with making a shortlist, doing an evaluation, getting buy-in
from other stakeholders, and making a purchase recommendation to the
economic buyer.

•
End Users. End users will often be consulted in a purchase and may be
involved in a proof of concept. They may not have the power to make a
purchase decision but frequently have the power to stop a deal from
happening if they don’t like the product the champion is recommending.
They are also critically important post-sale, particularly if you have a
recurring revenue model.
•
IT Department. Sometimes you are selling directly to the IT department, but
often the budget for a technology purchase is held by a line of business (for
example, sales, marketing, HR), and the evaluation happens primarily by
those non-IT groups. In those cases, the IT department will often need to
approve any technology purchase. Much like end users, if they are not the
budget holders for the purchase, they don’t get to make the final decision of
what product to purchase, but they can stop a deal from happening if it
doesn’t meet their requirements for interoperability, manageability, or
security, for example.
•
Legal and Purchasing. If you sell to larger organizations, purchasing and
legal teams might get involved in the latter stages of a deal. They don’t
usually get involved actively in the selection of a solution, but like other
groups listed above, they do have the power to stop a purchase if it doesn’t
meet the company’s legal or supplier agreement requirements.
Sell to Your Champion

In the early stages of a purchase process, the champion matters much more
than any other person. It’s the champion who is doing the research to
determine what the requirements are and making a shortlist. They are
frequently the person sitting across from you in a first sales call. If you
can’t get the champion interested, you don’t even get a chance to worry
about all the other stakeholders because the champion is going to eliminate
you from the process before they get those other groups involved.

“How do you beat
Bobby Fischer?
You play him at any
game but chess.”
Warren Buffett

That doesn’t mean that the other stakeholders aren’t important. As I
mentioned, any one of those stakeholder groups holds the power to kill a
sale at different points in the purchase process. You will need to worry
about them, but that worry comes later. Once the champion has decided to
consider your product as a potential solution, then a key part of your job is
to understand the potential objections of all the other stakeholders and to
arm the champion with the information to handle those objections.

Determining and Documenting
the Positioning Components
Once you are clear on what you are positioning and who the pitch is for,
you can move on to documenting the component pieces of your positioning.
These will be the key inputs to your sales pitch.

Competitive Alternatives
There are two main types of competitive alternatives: status quo and direct.
As the name suggests, status quo alternatives are the things your current
customers were doing before they adopted your product. That could include
using a spreadsheet, hiring an intern to do it, or even doing it manually with
a pen and paper. This could also include using a legacy solution or
functionality that is included in a software package, such as a CRM or
accounting system, to get the job done. Direct alternatives are products that
buyers put on a shortlist of solutions during a purchase process.

You don’t need to position against competitors your prospects don’t know
about. You may know of companies that could compete against you, but the
sales department never sees them land on a shortlist. If so, for now you
don’t have to worry about positioning against them. Although your product
and strategy teams might want to keep an eye on these competitors as future
threats, your marketing and sales teams can ignore them for now. If at some
point you see these competitors show up in actual deals, you can adjust
your positioning to handle them at that time.
Unique Capabilities
Once you have listed your true competitive alternatives, you can create a
list of capabilities you have that the competitors don’t. Capabilities include
features of your product, but might also include capabilities of the company,
such as your pricing model, professional services, or integration with other
products in your portfolio. In the above LevelJump example, you can see
that being built on Salesforce is a differentiated capability.

Differentiated
capabilities might not be differentiated when compared to every alternative,
and that’s okay. Simply make a note of which competitor doesn’t have that
capability and move on.

Differentiated Value
The most critical component of your positioning is the value that only your
product provides. Customers don’t care that much about features; they care
about what those features can enable for their business
As you move down your list, you will see value themes start to emerge, and
you can cluster groups of features under the value theme they enable. That’s
a good thing. Customers can’t digest and remember dozens of value points,
so try to keep the number of value themes down to three or fewer.

Your interpretation of your unique value is deeply informed by what you
know about the good customers you already have, including their business
situation, the job they want to get done with your product, and their
business priorities. The more you understand that, the better job you will do
in translating your unique features to value.
Best-Fit Customers
Typically, the characteristics of a target account will be a combination of
firmographic characteristics of the company (for example, number of
employees, revenue), but also characteristics that are more specific to the
type of solution you are selling. These could include things like the number
of employees in a particular department, or other technology platforms the
company has already adopted, such as Amazon Web Services (AWS),
Salesforce, or Microsoft Office.

Market Category
You can think of the market category as the context you position your
product in. The job of the market category is to serve as a starting point for
prospects who don’t know too much about your product. It is the simplified
answer to the question, “What the heck is this thing?”

An effective sales
pitch tells the story
of the business value
only you can deliver.

A good way to assess your market category is to look at your unique value
and best-fit customers and ask, “Does this market category point best-fit
customers toward my value or does it point them somewhere else?” In the
case of LevelJump, we can see that sales enablement works for the
company as a market category because it clearly points the prospect to the
product’s value (sales training that drives improved revenue).

Capture and Review Your Positioning
I like to recommend that teams document their positioning in a long-form
file, where you can also capture relevant details about each component.
Start-ups I work with like to summarize their positioning in a one-page
format. 

What If Your Product Hasn’t Launched Yet?
If your product hasn’t launched yet or is in the early stages with only a few
paying customers, it’s likely you won’t know precisely what your
positioning is. If that is the case, you can still work through the process of
documenting your positioning and building a sales pitch to reflect it.
However, that positioning should be treated like a “positioning thesis.”
Your first wave of customers will help you validate your thesis. In my
experience, you should expect your positioning to shift a lot as you learn
more about which customers love your product and why.

Positioning Will Change Over Time
Positioning is not a “set it and forget it” exercise. Your product’s
capabilities and its value will change over time. Your competitors are also
upgrading their products, and things that are differentiators for you today
might not be in the future. New competitors may enter the market, and
others may exit. Customer preferences and spending priorities will also
change over time.

Mapping Positioning
Components to the Sales Pitch

1
Insight: This step in the sales pitch comes from a combination of your
differentiated value and your best-fit customers. Insight represents the
critical concepts your best-fit customers need to be aware of to understand
why your unique value matters.
2
Alternatives: This step maps directly to the competitive alternatives you
have captured in your positioning.
3
The Perfect World: The Perfect World step maps to your differentiated
value. You can think of this step as a way of defining purchase criteria for
the customers you sell to.
4
The Introduction: Here, you introduce the product using the market
category from your positioning.
5
Differentiated Value: This maps directly to the differentiated value and
unique capabilities from your positioning. This step in the sales pitch is all
about demonstrating the value that only you can deliver and showing the
features that enable that value.
6
Proof: This is the proof that you can deliver on the value you say you can.
7–8
Objections and The Ask: These two steps do not come from your
positioning, but rather from your own sales experience and process.
Next, I will dive into each part of the pitch, including the details of how to
map the components of your positioning to each step.


Part – 4

Constructing
the Sales Pitch
Storyboard

Now that we have a structure and we
understand the component pieces
of positioning we need as inputs into
the sales pitch, it’s time to work on
building a storyboard for the pitch.

Bringing a Team Together to Work on the Pitch

One big decision you’ll need to make is whom to involve in building the
sales pitch. I am a big believer in cross-functional team efforts for
positioning and pitch development. In my experience, most weak
positioning comes from misalignment across the team. Often, marketing
and sales don’t totally agree on what the differentiated value is, or product
and sales don’t see eye to eye on which competitors you need to position
against. Founders can sometimes be focused so much on the future vision of
the company that they lose sight of how to position the product as it exists
today. Bringing the team together ensures that you are getting everyone’s
expertise and opinions out on the table, and also that everyone understands
the positioning and pitch you end up with.
When I work with teams on their positioning, I like to make sure there is
representation from sales, marketing, product, and customer success in the
room, in addition to the founders/CEO and anyone else on the executive
team who has a strong opinion about how the company wins in the market.

I often have this larger group develop a narrative
storyboard to start. Once you agree on the pitch at a storyboard level, a
small group, usually consisting of folks from the sales and marketing teams,
can work to translate that storyboard into an actual sales pitch with a
branded deck, a demo, and a script.

Build a Storyboard First
I often find that teams get hung up on a particular part of a sales pitch while
building it. In my opinion, it’s much more important that you get the flow
of the sales pitch right before dive into the details of the exact words or
graphics you need on particular slides. Similarly, I think it’s better to
determine where the demo should fit and what you want that demo to
convey conceptually first. You can worry about the specifics of the demo
script later.

Now, let’s jump into the starting component of the sales pitch: Insight.

Step 1
Insight

Earlier I talked about sales pitch
frameworks used by other companies.
One of the things that sets this sales
pitch structure apart from those is the
way thepitch starts.

Starting with a generic “problem” statement or visible market trend made it
difficult for us to differentiate our product from others that claimed to solve
the same problem or responded to the same trend. Jumping immediately to
a product demo or simply talking about our company left us no room to
position ourselves relative to other alternatives in the market. Starting with
open questions and discovery didn’t give us a structured method to teach
buyers a way to think about the market.

You want to start a sales conversation in a way that sets up your
differentiated value right from the start. The best way to do that is to start
with the market insight that makes your differentiated value important to
customers.
I’ve repeatedly seen how powerful this opening style can be. The fantastic
thing about leading with insight is that it:

“A lot of times,
people don’t
know what they
want until you
show it to them.”
Steve Jobs

1
Immediately establishes your credibility as experienced and knowledgeable
about the space.
2
Frames the customer’s situation in a way that orients the discussion toward
your differentiated value (and nobody else’s), right from the beginning.
3
Sets up a discussion with the prospect about the overall market. Starting
with market insight makes it easy to transition to talking about the other
approaches to solving the problem and space to do discovery.
Your insight is the key element a prospect needs to get to understand the
importance of your differentiated value. One way to think about insight is to
view it as “the problem inside the problem.”

Problems Aren’t Unique, Insights Are

LevelJump is in the sales enablement market. Solutions in that market are
focused on helping sales teams train salespeople. So how should
LevelJump’s insight be framed?
The simplest way to define the prospect’s problem is, “How do we ensure
that salespeople are effectively trained?” But every solution in the market
solves that problem, including LevelJump. We can reverse-engineer
LevelJump’s insight into the market by starting with their differentiated
value.

LevelJump is the only sales enablement solution that is built on top of
Salesforce. That deeper level of integration allows sales enablement
professionals to combine their sales training data with sales performance
data. The differentiated value that LevelJump enables for its customers is
that it can track the impact of sales training on sales results, giving sales
enablement professionals a way to see what’s working and what isn’t.
LevelJump gives the sales enablement team a way to increase revenue
through improved sales rep ramp times and to prove the impact of their
work. Although other sales enablement solutions can help solve the problem
of training sales reps, no other solution can provide a way to measure and
improve the impact of that training.


So what is LevelJump’s unique insight into the market? What is it that
prospects need to know to understand how important their unique value is
to them? For prospects to understand LevelJump’s unique value, they need
to understand that sales enablement is about more than just getting the reps
trained and tracking the training. We should be able to measure the success
of our sales enablement programs with an improvement of specific sales
metrics—for example, the time to first call, time to first deal, and time to
reach quota. LevelJump is the only company on the market with this
particular insight or point of view on the real underlying problem that needs
to be solved with sales enablement.

Your Insight Should Point to Your Value
If done correctly, your insight into the market should direct the conversation
toward your value from the onset.

Rep: Hey, thanks for taking the time today. Before we jump into the demo, I
wanted to chat a little about how we think about sales enablement. In the
companies we have worked with, we’ve seen that they are investing in sales
enablement because it can really make an impact on sales performance and
revenue. Every day your reps aren’t making quota costs you money. What
metrics do you folks use to track enablement?
Head of sales enablement: At the beginning, we were just using a shared
drive, and that made it hard to track anything. More recently, we’ve been
looking at using an LMS [learning management system] so we could start
tracking which reps have done which training. We’ve never really thought
about how to bring sales metrics into it.

Rep: Many of the companies we’ve worked with have an LMS—it’s the
perfect tool for corporate training that you need to ensure gets done, like
safety or compliance training. For sales training, however, an LMS doesn’t
give you an easy way to track if your sales enablement programs are
improving time to first deal or time to make quota. Folks that run sales
enablement often struggle to prove the impact of the programs they are
developing. How do you do that for your exec team today?
Head of sales enablement: We really struggle with that, to be honest. I
would love a way to show our impact.

Rep: Many of the companies we’ve worked with have an LMS—it’s the
perfect tool for corporate training that you need to ensure gets done, like
safety or compliance training. For sales training, however, an LMS doesn’t
give you an easy way to track if your sales enablement programs are
improving time to first deal or time to make quota. Folks that run sales
enablement often struggle to prove the impact of the programs they are
developing. How do you do that for your exec team today?
Head of sales enablement: We really struggle with that, to be honest. I
would love a way to show our impact.

How Do You Determine Your Insight?
I believe that every successful company has a unique point of view on the
market—they just aren’t always great at articulating it. Sometimes you
know exactly what your unique insight is because your product was
originally designed around it. Other companies develop their insight as they
sell more product and gradually gain a better understanding of their
customers, their situation, and the value they can bring to the table that
other alternative solutions cannot.

In both cases, there may be individual folks on the team who can speak to
the company’s point of view, but often, sales and marketing teams fall into
the trap of focusing on “the problem” or market trends because they’re
more obvious and therefore easier to identify. The words for these problems
and trends already exist in the market, making it easy to write and talk
about them.

Consider the Point of View of
Your Best-Fit Customers
One way of thinking about your unique market insight is to ask this
question: “What do your best-fit prospects need to know to understand why
your unique value is important to them?”

Your unique insight
into the market is what
leads you to build a
product that is different
and better than the
alternatives.

What the buyer should ask is, “How do I improve the sales results for a new
rep?” Or, even more specifically, “How do we get a new rep ramped up
quicker so they can get a first deal faster and make quota faster?”
LevelJump’s unique insight into the market is that a company realizes the
value of sales onboarding only if it can measure the impact of it with sales
metrics.
And that’s why LevelJump’s sales pitch starts with an implied question:
“Why is sales onboarding important?” The answer is that the shorter the
sales ramp time, the more revenue the company makes. Starting the
narrative here accomplishes everything the company wants in the first step
of a pitch:
1
It orients the prospect toward LevelJump’s unique value (sales enablement
that improves sales results) from the start of the conversation.
2
The insight is unique to LevelJump: none of its competitors look at the
market in this way, paving a path for a clearly differentiated narrative.
3
The insight is clear and easy to understand for a prospect that is a good fit
for LevelJump (the head of sales enablement at a company that is
onboarding a lot of new reps).
Practical Tips
The key to this step is to frame the discussion that comes after it.
Sometimes, you will want to follow up your insight with industry research
that proves that your insight is true.
Sometimes, the insight will seem like an obvious statement of fact, and
that’s okay.
My overall recommendation for this step is that you do not spend too much
time on it. In many companies I have worked with, one slide (if you want to
use slides) and a minute or two of discussion is more than enough

Once you have framed the discussion around your insight, your next move
is to paint a picture of the entire market and the alternative approaches a
company may choose to take.

Step 2
Alternatives

Many companies avoid talking about
competitors because they don’t
want to be seen as bad-mouthing the
competition, which only makes them
look bad.

Most companies also feel that no buyer would believe their opinion about a competitor because they are inherently
biased. But to make a good choice, buyers need to understand the entire market and the pros and cons of different
approaches to solving their problem.
Think of your competition as “approaches to the problem” rather than individual companies. The easiest way for
prospects to make sense of a market is to stop thinking about it as an unorganized list of different independent
vendors and products and start thinking of it as groups of vendors that share a particular approach to the problem.
In a good sales pitch, you are contrasting the different approaches to the problem, rather than trying to compare
individual products.
How Should Your Customers
Think about Their Options?

The biggest difference between a considered and an unconsidered purchase is that in an unconsidered purchase,
buyers don’t spend much time, if any, considering their options.
But in a considered purchase, they can spend days, or months, figuring out what their options are and how to make
a choice. So what’s going on in that time frame? The buyer is working through a purchase process to:
•
Clarify the problem. Why do we need a new solution? What does success look like?
•
Build a list of solution requirements. What is important for us in a solution? What isn’t important? What is
possible and what isn’t with the current technology on the market?

•
Explore multiple vendors. Who should be on the shortlist and how do I evaluate these vendors?
This step in the positioning narrative is all about helping customers make sense of their alternatives and the tradeoffs
associated with each. New start-ups often fall into a common trap of believing that because their solution is
new or located in an emerging market space, there is no competition. But there is always an alternative way to
accomplish what your solution does, even if that alternative is manual processes and Excel spreadsheets. The key
here is to understand what a customer sees as an alternative to your solution, not what you would necessarily
consider a direct competitor.

Position Yourself against the Fearsome Status Quo
Sales teams in software companies tend to describe losing to a status quo solution as losing to “no decision,” but
that’s dangerous thinking for sales and marketing teams. A decision was made, whether it was to stick with what
they were doing longer term or, as happens more often, to delay making a decision altogether.
You need to view the customer’s option to stick with the status quo as a competitive alternative, even if you don’t
view the solution they are using as direct competition.
Consider Direct Competitors,
but Only if They Land on a Prospect’s Shortlist
Besides the status quo alternative, you also need to understand what other solutions are landing on a buyer’s
shortlist. Most business buyers don’t simply select the first solution they come across. They do their homework
and narrow down a shortlist of alternatives to examine more closely. Just as you need to look at the status quo the
way a customer does, you also need to look at shortlist competitors from the customer’s point of view.
At this step of the sales pitch, you will need to stay rooted in the facts of the market as it exists today and in the
near future. Although your product and strategy teams might be tracking dozens of potential “horizon” competitors
(competitors you may have in the future), you don’t need to position against anything a customer does not
currently consider. There is also a real danger associated with giving prospects new approaches to think about.
They might feel they need to go back and research these newly introduced options, further delaying a purchase
decision. Companies that orient their marketing and sales stories too closely around a future vision of the market
are only giving buyers more reasons to do what they are most inclined to do—delay making any purchase at all.

Group Competitors into “Approaches”
Your goal at this step in the sales pitch is to help the buyer make sense of their options. To do that, you need to
group all the alternatives in the market into different “approaches” to solving the problem. The easiest way to
make sense of a market is to think of it as groups of vendors that share a particular approach to the job they satisfy

We don’t compete
with companies or
products. We compete
with approaches.
Grouping Competitors Helps
Your Customers Understand Your Value
Your competitive alternatives might be broken up into “manual solutions” such as spreadsheets and Word
documents or other ways of manually tracking who is working on what; “easy to use, all-purpose project
management tools” like Trello or Basecamp; and “enterprise project management tools” such as Jira or Atlassian.
Breaking up the market in this way highlights that there are tools more suitable to smaller businesses and some
more suitable for larger businesses. In dividing it up this way, we are helping best-fit buyers (multi-project
agencies of fewer than thirty employees) understand that an “all-purpose tool” might be lacking features they
might specifically require, but similarly, an “enterprise tool” would be too complex and expensive for a company
of their size. This sets up a conversation with a prospect in which you can easily highlight the gap you fill in the market.

Should You Call Out Competitors by Name?
This is your decision to make, but I generally prefer not to name competitors unless we are almost guaranteed that
the prospect has already looked at them as a potential solution. We don’t want to give buyers a reason to go away
and research a new set of competitors. As part of the discovery the rep is doing during this step in the sales pitch,
they can easily ask the prospect what other solutions they are considering, and then categorize them. That said, if
there is a competitor that is seen in nearly every deal, I wouldn’t hesitate to explicitly name the elephant in the
room.
It’s Okay to Position a Competitor in a
Way They Would Disagree with as Long as
You Believe That It’s Objectively True

When you group these competitors, it’s important to do so according to your point of view on how they should be
categorized. This may not be the way the competitors categorize themselves, and it may also conflict with how
some industry analysts or other third parties categorize them. Often, competitors are exaggerating their capabilities
in certain ways or marketing them in a way that is misleading for customers (either deliberately or not).
This is your opportunity to educate your prospects about where you believe your competitors really land in the
market after you strip away all the marketing buzzwords and subterfuge. However, this does not give you a license
to lie. At this step, it is critical to present your case as objectively as possible. Your role is to be an informed guide
—one who has the customer’s best interests at heart. Nothing will destroy a customer’s trust in your advice faster
than catching you out in a lie.

Discovery is
a conversation,
not a lecture.

Outline the Pros and Cons of Each
Alternative for Different Customers
Once you have categorized the alternative approaches, you need to outline the pros and cons of each alternative for
different types of customers. For our project management tool example, that might look something like this:

 

At this point, you have painted a picture of the entire market for the prospect. You can now have a clear
conversation with the customer about the different approaches available to them and why they may or may not
want to take each approach.
The pros and cons of each alternative approach can be crafted with a qualified prospect in mind. You generally
already know something about the customer’s current situation because they have already been qualified. Since the
key value proposition is around planning resourcing across multiple projects, prospects who don’t need that would
already be disqualified. Similarly, larger companies that might want an “enterprise” solution would also be
disqualified.

This Is a Discovery
Conversation, Not a Lecture
The Alternatives step is where you want to do discovery with the client. This discovery should happen in the form
of a conversation with the prospect rather than a lecture from the sales rep.

A common mistake inexperienced sellers make in discovery is asking questions about the customer’s pain and
problems with the expectation that prospects already know exactly what they are looking for. As I’ve said earlier,
many buyers have never purchased a product like yours before. Often, they are not entirely sure what their
purchase criteria are or should be, and they are still learning what is and isn’t possible with the current solutions on
the market. They understand their immediate problem, but there may be dimensions to the problem they haven’t
thought about yet. A salesperson quizzing a buyer on what exactly they’re looking for might, at best, result in the
buyer giving some fuzzy answers to try to move the discussion along. At worst, this kind of questioning could
leave the buyer feeling annoyed and worried that the sales rep doesn’t know any more about the market than they
do.
Instead, you want to use this step in the narrative to have a back-and-forth discovery conversation in which you are
learning about the customer’s situation, but you are also teaching the customer about the market. For example, the
conversation could potentially go like this:
Rep: We work with customer software development shops like yours that are looking for a new way to manage
projects and resources across projects. Often, we see companies like yours picking one of these three categories of
solutions. I understand you folks have been tracking your projects manually. How’s that working out for you?
Prospect: We designed a set of templates in Excel and have been tracking projects like that since we started the
business. Lately, we have seen some growth and it’s become a bit more complex to get a handle on who is working
on what.
Rep: We hear this a lot. Most of the companies that have adopted our tool have outgrown manual solutions. The
project management space is really crowded, but we find most tools can be described as either easy-to-use allpurpose
project management or more enterprise-oriented tools, like Jira. Have you folks looked at any other
solutions so far?
Prospect: Well, Jira would be overkill for us. We have looked at Trello and we love the simplicity of what they do.
Rep: Trello is a great product and certainly easy to use. Have you looked at the resource planning capabilities of
Trello? We have found that most tools like Trello weren’t designed with agencies in mind. They typically don’t
support views and analysis that cross multiple projects, something that is critical to the agency customers that we
work with.
Prospect: We haven’t seen much in their tool that would help us with that, so, yes, that does appear to be a gap.
This step in the sales pitch should really be a dialogue with the customer. Combined with actively teaching the
prospect the pros and cons of other alternatives, it will include discovery questions such as: How are you handling
this today? How is that approach working for you? What other solutions are you looking at?

Practical Tips
People often ask me how the Alternatives step should look if they are using slides. Should this be illustrated with a
picture? A table? Something else? I have seen companies do this step in several different ways. Some use a table
like the one I used above. Some draw a picture with the different alternatives mapped onto a four-by-four grid. I
have also seen many companies do this step without a slide at all; they simply have a lightly scripted conversation.
Personally, I like a table, but I keep the number of words to a minimum so that it is more of a conversation guide
than something a rep might be tempted to read.

As with the previous step, I also would caution you to be careful not to spend too much time here. It’s critical to
have the conversation, but the goal here is to paint a picture of the market for the prospect, help them understand
the pros and cons of the different approaches while simultaneously getting your discovery questions answered, and
then move on.


Step 3
The Perfect
World
The purpose of this step in the sales
pitch is to clearly state what you
believe the purchase criteria should
be for a solution, assuming the buyer
is a best-fit customer and they agree
with your point of view.

Getting Aligned on Your
Point of View on the Market
The goal of this step is to ensure the prospect understands and agrees with
your point of view on what is and isn’t important for a buyer like them. You
do this by reiterating the insight you shared in Step 1 and the conclusions
you can draw from the pros and cons of the alternative solutions you
discussed in Step 2. If you continue with the example from the previous
chapter, the conversation at this step would go something like this:
Rep: We know that effective resource planning is incredibly important for
agencies. In a perfect world, you would have a project management tool that
•
is as easy to use as a low-end, all-purpose tool like Trello,
•
but is designed to help you manage a growing team across a growing
number of projects,
•
all without the cost or complexity of traditional enterprise project
management tools.
Right?

That “right?” from the sales rep is a critical turning point in this pitch. It
goes one of two ways now: 1) The customer doesn’t agree, which generally
means they have disqualified themselves. If they don’t see your point of
view as critically important to them, then your unique value simply isn’t
going to resonate, and essentially you have nothing to sell them. Or, 2) the
customer responds with, “Yep, you’re right,” and you have already done the
hard work of making the sale. The customer has agreed that their purchase
criteria should look like the above list. They have chosen the value only you
can deliver. Now all that is left to do is show them how your solution
delivers it. Most importantly, if the prospect agrees with you at this point,
they have also agreed that the alternatives can’t meet their needs. The deal is
yours to lose from this point forward.

Practical Tips
In this step, you are making sure the prospect agrees with your point of view
on the world. If it is clear the customer is with you, then there is no need to
linger here. Simply move on to the next step. Overall, reps should move
through the first three steps of the sales pitch—Insight, Alternatives, and The
Perfect World—fairly quickly. For many companies I have worked with, the
setup part of a first call is done in around five to ten minutes, or less if the
first call is scheduled for less than an hour. A great setup is setting the
context for your differentiated value. If you are taking too long to get to the
value step, you risk losing the customer’s interest before you have arrived at
the meat of the pitch.



Step 4
The Introduction

Now you are ready to switch your
focus from the market to your
solution. The first step is to introduce
the company and the solution.

If you are a multi-product company, this is your chance to position your
entire company, the products you offer, and the particular product that this
pitch is focused on (assuming there is only one product that is the focus of
this pitch). If you are a single-product company, then this is a simple
introduction to the product
The structure of your introduction in the pitch will depend on your specific
sales strategy. For single-product start-ups, this step is an introduction to the
product at a high level. Often, this can be done by introducing the market
category and briefly outlining what your product is designed to do. Multiproduct
companies will often introduce everything the company can do and
explain how this particular product fits in their portfolio.
In this introduction, a diagram is a common tool that either illustrates the
component pieces of your solution or shows how your solution might fit
into the prospect’s existing technology stack. There are three common
diagrams I see used at this step: the family diagram, the platform diagram,
and the “marketecture” diagram.



The family diagram: For multi-product companies, the product family
diagram is a clear and easy way to describe all the products in the family
and how they fit together.
The platform diagram: For companies that sell a platform, a diagram can be
a concise way to show prospects the range of functionality that is included
as part of the platform. Components might be available separately or they
might be included. Sometimes, you will want to expose packaging options
in the diagram. For example, if there are add-on components that customers
don’t want and worry they will be forced to pay for, it could make sense in
the diagram to explicitly signal that these components are entirely optional.
Other times, you may want to show the full spectrum of functionality and
leave the packaging and pricing discussions for later. For example, if the
ideal combination of options is dependent on understanding a customer’s
needs first, you would want to expose everything in the diagram and leave
the discussion of the precise configuration until later in the sales process.
The “marketecture” diagram: For certain types of products, particularly
those with technical buyers or infrastructure products (such as data,
security, monitoring, and networking), it’s often important to illustrate how
your solutions fit in with everything else the buyer already has. Unlike a
technical and detailed architecture diagram, a “marketecture” diagram gives
buyers enough information to understand the major components of the
system and how those components interface or interact with each other. The
marketecture diagram should be easy for a sales rep to explain and a buyer
to understand. Done well, a good marketecture diagram clearly shows
which solutions your product interacts with and which it may replace.


“Proactive guidance
has a demonstrably
positive effect on
win rates.”
Matthew Dixon & Brent Adamson

Practical Tips
Orient the prospect quickly around what you are and what you do, but then
move on. The next step dives deeper into the value you deliver, and you
will want to spend the bulk of your time on this step in the sales pitch.

Step 5
Differentiated
Value

Helping customers understand the
value only you can deliver should be
the centerpiece of everything you do
in marketing and sales. Value is why
customers buy your product.

Customers don’t care about your features or capabilities, but they do care
about what those features can do for their business. And that’s why the
Differentiated Value step should be where you spend the most time in a first
sales call.
If you have done your job well in previous steps, you have already helped
the buyer understand why this value is important. Now, your main goal is to
demonstrate how you deliver that value to your prospect.
Many companies choose to do this step using a scripted demo with slides.
Some use a demo only and others will only use slides. I’ve seen companies
do an excellent job at this step in each of those ways. But when you are
working through how you want to do this step, there are some key points
you’ll need to consider.

Demo and Slides
Many companies I have worked with start the Differentiated Value step with
a slide that introduces the value themes. Then they move to a detailed demo
that walks through the key features that support each theme, and then move
back to the slide to reiterate the themes before moving to the next step.

I like this approach because it helps you focus on the value themes and
remember them as key takeaways. If you choose to go this route, I
encourage you to keep the text on the slides to a minimum and resist the
urge to list every feature. Remember, the point of the Differentiated Value
step is to demonstrate how your features deliver the value. But the most
important thing you want the prospect to remember at the end of the step is
the value—not the features.

If one or more of your value themes don’t lend themselves to a demo, using
a mix of slides and a demo works for this step. Value themes related to
support/services, pricing models, or packaging would fall into this category.
You can work those into the script or cover them in a slide.

Demo Only
In many cases, the best way to describe how a product does a particular
thing is to show how it works. For example, if you have a value theme
related to the user experience of your product, your reps could attempt to
describe it, but it will be more impactful to show it in action. The way the
demo is organized is key.

This is not a product walkthrough. You should not be highlighting every
feature of the product. The goal is to reinforce your differentiated value by
showing how the product delivers that. If you have three distinct value
themes, the demo should be organized around them. The script for the demo
should be organized along these lines:
•
We deliver a combination of Value A, Value B, and Value C for our
customers.
•
Let’s start with Value A: here are the features that deliver that.
•
Now let’s move to Value B: here are the features that deliver that.
•
Lastly, we have Value C: here’s how we do that.
The key here is that the demo is organized to reinforce your differentiated
value and make that real for prospects by showing them how you deliver it.
A great product
demo puts features
in the context of the
value they enable.

Slides Only
It’s not unusual, especially for complex enterprise software, to have a first
call that does not include a demo. For products like a data warehouse, cloud
infrastructure software, and security software, often there isn’t much to
demonstrate. And even if you did a demo, it wouldn’t mean much if it was
not highly customized. You have a few choices in this situation.
Sometimes, it makes sense to create an example of what a customer
implementation might look like and use that in parts of the Differentiated
Value step to illustrate particular capabilities. Be sure to highlight what is
and isn’t included in your product. I’ve seen companies get in trouble at this
stage because the customer gets the impression that these customizations are
included in the base product.

Often, capabilities like these aren’t differentiating because any vendor
wishing to sell to this category of customers would have to meet this
functionality requirement. But even though your product is SOC 2 certified,
which is important for a customer to know, it’s not a differentiated value.
Still, you don’t want the customer to exclude you from the running because
they assume you don’t have that capability

April says: The pitch starts with Funnel’s market insight. The key to
recognizing Funnel’s value is understanding that data is critical to a
marketing team’s success, yet teams struggle to collect and use their
data.

Great digital marketing is all about data. We depend on deeply
understanding marketing data to optimize our digital marketing spend. But
gathering data across channels, normalizing it, and producing metrics the
business needs to analyze and improve performance is difficult, timeconsuming,
and error-prone.
April says: Next, Funnel needs to map the alternatives and illustrate the
gaps.
April says: Now Funnel can define the characteristics of a “perfect”
solution—in this case, they are defining a marketing data hub and the
value companies could get from having one.

If we believe that marketing’s success relies on our ability to analyze data,
we will conclude that marketing needs a central data hub. One that:
•
Easily pulls accurate data from any source
•
Stores all the data in a central place that marketing owns and can trust (that
the data is accurate and up to date)
•
Prepares the data for analysis automatically
•
Makes it easy to share data to analyze it any way marketing needs to—with
spreadsheets, data warehouses, reporting and analytics tools, etc.
April says: Next is the meat of the pitch, Funnel’s value.
Funnel is a marketing hub for data designed to help marketing teams get
control over their data to improve performance.
The value Funnel delivers:
•
Brings all marketing data together from any source. The rep can demo how,
in a few clicks, Funnel can connect to data from any source without code.
•
Stores data in a central hub, giving marketing teams control over the data
they need to improve digital marketing performance. The rep can show the
data hub, including the raw data, transformed data, and data logic.
•
Automatically makes siloed raw data business-ready. The rep can show how
automatic mapping works and how users can control how data is mapped
without code.
•
Easily makes marketing data available wherever it is needed. The rep can
demonstrate connecting a business intelligence (BI) tool to Funnel in a few
clicks.
April says: The pitch then winds up with a case study as proof that
Funnel can deliver the value points covered in the value section, and
then ends by getting an agreement with the prospect to move forward to
the next stage of their sales process.

Step 6
Proof

Since the dawn of mass marketing,
vendors have been spinning, stretching,
and just plain ignoring the truth.

Buyers have learned that just because the company says it can do something
does not make it so. So, if you are going to make a claim of value, you will
need to back it up with some proof.
Proof can take many different forms. When I am working with start-ups on
their sales pitches, they often assume that “proof” must be empirical, or
something to which they can assign concrete numbers. Claims like “30
percent faster,” or “save 10 hours per week on administration tasks,” or “99
percent uptime” are examples of empirical proof that you may have
validated either across a large group of customers or with a third party.
These are great proof points, and if you have them, you should consider
using them at this step.

However, not all claims lend themselves to this type of proof. Sometimes
value is difficult to measure. For example, suppose one of your core value
points is that you make it easy for a user to get up and running on the
software. You could show that directly in a demo, and that would help the
buyer get a feel for how easy it might be. You might be able to get data that
shows that users on your system feel fully trained in a day versus a week for
your competitors. You can also prove value by having customers talk about
their own experiences and how easy it was for them to get their users up
and running on the system. Remember that you saying something about
your own product isn’t proof, but a customer saying it is.

Here is a list of some ways you can prove that a value point is true:
1
Customer case studies
2
Third-party verification
3
Certification—for example, you have SOC 2 compliance for security
4
Statistics that are validated by your customers
5
Customer quotes
6
Quotes or reviews from industry analysts
7
Industry research or survey results from third parties
8
Awards

“Facts tell, but
stories sell.”
Bryan Eisenberg


Step 7
Objections

A good salesperson will handle any
questions or objections a customer may
have as they occur in the sales meeting.
However, you may notice that there are
common objections that are crucial to
address in the first meeting, whether or
not the customer has raised them.
This step is optional. If you find there are common unspoken objections you
need to handle, this is when you would do that, but if not, you can skip this
step.

Typical objections and responses might sound something like this:
Prospect: This sounds difficult to deploy.
Rep: We have a dedicated team that will help you with deployment. Here’s
what a typical deployment schedule looks like, and it usually it takes two
weeks.
Prospect: The price is likely too high for us. / We aren’t sure we have the
budget.
• • •
Rep: This is the way our pricing model works and what this would look like
for three different types of customers. We can give you a specific quote for
your situation whenever you are ready.
Prospect: Getting end users to adopt this will be difficult.
• • •
Rep: We have a dedicated training team that will work with you to get users
onboarded. Here’s what some of our customers have to say about user
onboarding.
Prospect: We don’t want everything now, just pieces of it.
• • •
Rep: Our platform is modular, and it isn’t uncommon that customers want
to start small and grow with us. Here’s how those steps usually look over
time.
Prospect: Anything we adopt needs to be compliant with certain regulations.
/ Anything we adopt needs to integrate with our existing infrastructure.
• • •
Rep: We are currently compliant with all regulations necessary for a
solution like this, and we would be happy to walk your technical team
through this. We integrate easily with your current infrastructure through
our well-documented API. Most deployments take about two weeks for
integration work. Our services team can help plan how best to do that, and
we would be happy to talk to your technical team about how that would
work.

Anticipating and
handling unspoken
objections is often
a critical component
of a first sales call.

Rep: We know that switching providers for a solution like this is never easy,
so we make it as seamless as possible to get started with us. Our clients
often start with a small initial deployment. Our team can help you define
what the requirements would be, and usually we can get a client like you up
and running in as little as a week.
• • •
Rep: Most of our clients find it helpful to start with a proof of concept,
where you can get a feel for how our solution works with your data. We can
easily migrate the data into our system for you in as little as a day, and we
don’t need the assistance of your IT department.
• • •
Rep: Some clients worry about how our system would work with your
existing tools. We have a set of pre-built integrations that cover most tools
teams like yours use. We also have an API that allows for custom
integrations.

Rep: We know that you operate in a regulated industry, so our solution is
SOC 2 and ISO 27001 certified. We have worked with X, Y, and Z
corporations and satisfied their compliance and security requirements, so
we are sure we can satisfy yours. We often find it helpful to meet directly
with the IT team at some point to help them understand the depth of our
security posture.
Practical Tips
What about a common objection that you don’t have a good response for?
In this case, I would not recommend that you deliberately call the objection
out if the customer hasn’t raised it. That said, if in the course of building
this sales pitch you realize there is an objection you simply aren’t doing a
great job of handling, take this as a sign that fixing the problem should
move up in your list of priorities.

Step 8
The Ask

Just like the other stages of the sales
pitch, you want to be deliberate about
the way your conversation comes
to an end. That includes helping your
prospect decide what to do next.

It isn’t unusual to see inexperienced sales folks get to the end of a sales
meeting and leave it up to the prospect entirely to decide what the next step
should be. Now is the time to embrace your role as a guide helping the buyer
through the purchase process.
“The Ask” will depend on what you believe is the best next step in your
purchase process. For example, if your best-fit customers usually run a proof
of concept (POC) and your team wants to encourage that, suggesting how to
move forward with a POC would be a good ask, using these questions as
guidelines:

•
Who needs to be involved with a POC?
•
Do we need to set up an additional meeting with those folks?
•
Are there other steps that need to be taken (signed non-disclosure
agreements, a completed security review, etc.)?
•
If so, how would we get them completed?

The next step could be a fully customized demo in front of a wider group of
stakeholders, getting the client signed up for a trial version of the product,
asking if you can prepare a detailed quote, or simply asking for the sale.
Whatever it is, be sure that the meeting doesn’t end without a clear next step
Not every buyer should or will move past a first sales call. The goal in the
first call should not be to get every customer closer to making a purchase.
Instead, your goal is to get every good-fit buyer past this stage. A good first
sales call will get good-fit prospects excited to move forward; it should also
make clear to bad-fit prospects that this is not the solution for them. Ideally,
your qualification step will weed out most of the bad-fit clients, but don’t
expect it to weed them all out. Quickly getting misaligned prospects out of
your sales process is good for everyone.

Practical Tips
Mature sales organizations will have a documented and tested sales process
with a set of distinct steps they move though before a deal is closed. Many
start-ups fail to have an ask at the end of their sales pitch at all (“Call us if
you have any questions!” doesn’t count). If your company is new and your
sales process is less evolved, a good starting point to get some structure is to
be consistent in what you ask the customer to do after the first sales call.
This will also give you a starting point to at least test which call to action
works best with your customer set.
Gearset’s Differentiators
Gearset’s main differentiators come from their background in DevOps. First,
they believe teams deploying Salesforce releases should work like any other
development team, using standard DevOps tool sets and processes as far as
possible. In contrast, Gearset’s rivals chose to implement their own solutions
for things like project management and source control.
Second, Gearset is built outside of Salesforce, allowing the team to leverage
the most suitable technologies to provide tailored solutions to problems
unique to Salesforce, like sophisticated comparison, merging, and
deployment for Salesforce metadata. Gearset’s rivals chose to build on top of
Salesforce, constraining them within its UX paradigms, and to focus on
breadth over depth.
And third, Gearset has a much larger customer set than any of their
competitors, making them a deeply experienced, trusted choice.

Translating
the Storyboard
into a
Sales Pitch

Congratulations! You have a storyboard
for your sales pitch. Next, you need
to turn the storyboard into a pitch your
reps can use.
Where and How to Use
Slides, a Demo, and a Script
Building the final sales pitch generally involves a team effort between
marketing and sales. Marketing can help with crafting slides, getting
graphics created, and wordsmithing the script. Sales needs to ensure that
what gets built fits the timeline of a first conversation and makes sense in
the context of a sales call.
Do You Really Need a Standard Deck and a Script?
Every mature sales organization I know has a standard first-call sales pitch
deck that reps are trained to use and that comes with some form of script
that teaches them what to say. Some start-ups I’ve worked with are
uncomfortable with the idea of a “scripted” deck because they worry that
the sales reps will simply repeat the script like robots. Obviously, you don’t
want sales robots, but you do want to get some standardization in the first
call for several reasons.
“Don’t sell
life insurance.
Sell what life
insurance can do.”
Ben Feldman

First and foremost, a standardized first-call deck ensures that you are
consistently positioning your offerings in the best way you can. You agreed
on your positioning at the executive team level, using everything you know
about your customers, competitors, and differentiated value. You need to
ensure that you are telling your best story to every prospect.
Second, a standardized deck makes it much easier to onboard new reps.
Your most experienced salespeople might know enough to wing their way
through a pitch, but a new rep never will. As you scale, fast onboarding
becomes critically important.
Third, it’s impossible to measure and learn what’s working and what isn’t if
every rep is having a different conversation in the first call. Standardization
helps you understand when and where things need to change.

The script can take the form of a word-by-word story or simply be a series
of bullet points and suggestions. Either works fine, in my opinion, and you
should expect sales reps, as they get comfortable with the story, to
improvise and add their own flair to it. What you don’t want to see are reps
significantly changing the story to the point at which you have lost the flow
completely, or you are no longer centered on your differentiated value.
There is also a tendency for sales reps to drift off message over time. The
mature sales organizations I have worked with will periodically “recertify”
reps on the pitch by having them pitch to the sales executive to ensure that
the story remains consistent. Without regular check-ins, it becomes very
hard to ensure that your sales team is delivering the message in a consistent
way over time.

Slides versus a Conversation
Different companies will choose different ways to communicate each step
of the pitch. Some teams prefer to use slides; others will choose to simply
have a conversation. Some products show well in a demo and others don’t.
Some companies like to have a full, detailed script, and others stick with
bullet points. Regardless of how you choose to build out the pitch, you will
need to make it consumable to your sales reps.

Step 1, Insight: The Insight step is generally done with a slide (or multiple
slides). I find it helps in making your point very clear to the prospect. I’ve
also seen reps very effectively do the entire setup phase in a quick
conversation with the customer.
Step 2, Alternatives: The competitive pros and cons can be done in a wide
variety of ways. I’ve always used a very simple table for this step, but I’m
careful to keep the number of words to a minimum. I like having a visual
reference, but I don’t want the prospect reading a slide when we should be
having a discovery conversation. In my experience, the script for this slide
works best if you give reps the key pros and cons of each solution in bullet
form, plus a set of questions they can work into a discovery conversation.
We generally expect this step to be free-flowing, so I would not expect reps
to stick to a strict script here, but I would expect them to find a way to make
their key points and ask the key questions. The route reps take to get there
can vary.
Step 3, The Perfect World: This step can be done easily with or without a
slide. Sometimes I like to position this as the conclusion to our discovery
conversation and leave it at that. If The Perfect World has several points,
sometimes I like to have a slide just to reiterate those points.
Step 4, The Introduction: The Introduction is generally done with a slide.
Often, it will include a graphic to help introduce the offering, particularly
when the offering is a suite or platform, or if you are introducing everything
the company delivers.
Step 5, Differentiated Value: Differentiated Value is often done with a
demo, but it doesn’t need to be. For highly customizable products, I’ve seen
companies do this step with slides, or slides with screenshots, and then use
a customized demo later in the sales process. If you do intend to use a
demo, the demo flow needs to follow the value themes. I often use a slide to
introduce the value themes, then run the demo, and then wrap up with a
slide that reiterates the value themes again at the end. You should script this
demo, but how much scripting you use is totally up to you. I prefer to have
a full, detailed script that a brand-new rep can use without assistance from a
sales engineer. As a rep gets more comfortable with the demo, they can then
improvise, as long as they are sticking to the value themes.
Step 6, Proof: The Proof step is often a case study, a logo slide, and
potentially some “sparklers,” like awards or accolades, and is usually done
with slides.
Step 7, Objections: How you present the optional Objections step will
depend on the message you need to communicate. It is done either with a
slide or a scripted talk track for the rep.

Step 8, The Ask: The Ask can be a slide or scripted discussion.
Now you have a set of slides, a demo, and a script your sales team can use
for a first call with a prospect. But we aren’t quite at the finish line yet.
Next, we need to validate that the pitch works and then roll it out to the
sales team. We also want to start thinking about how the sales narrative will
be used beyond sales calls.

Part 5:
Testing and
Launching the
Sales Pitch

Test, Discuss, Iterate (within Limits)
Ideally, during the testing phase, the folks who created the sales pitch
should be listening to each call the rep is doing. After every call, the team
should sit down and compare notes on what they felt did and did not work
in the meeting.
•
Where was the prospect getting lost?
•
Where was the prospect getting excited?
•
Were there questions asked that might indicate there was something
confusing in the pitch?

Be careful, however, that you
don’t start to iterate on anything that is a core part of the sales pitch itself.
It’s fine to make smaller changes, but you don’t want to ruin the test by
substantially changing the pitch itself.

The Pass/Fail Criteria
Most metrics we use to measure the effectiveness of a sales pitch take a
long time to measure. In the short term, it’s often hard to measure
empirically whether or not the pitch is working. In the long term, upgrading
your sales pitch will drive an improvement across a range of sales metrics.
For example, you would expect to see more leads progressing to the next
phase of your sales process, as well as bad leads dropping out early in your
process, and an upswing in close rates down the line as a result. As the
marketing team starts to adopt the story, your overall lead quality should
improve, along with a corresponding improvement in sales metrics.
However, if your sales cycles are long—weeks and months as opposed to
days—or you have a very high average deal size and therefore a low
volume of pitches to test on, you might need to move forward with less hard
evidence and more qualitative indicators that the pitch is or is not working.
We don’t know if
we have the best
story possible, but
we know if it’s better
than the old one.

What Happens if the Test Fails?
In my experience working with companies on sales pitches, a failed test at
this stage is rare, but it can happen. If the best minds, with the most
customer knowledge in the company, are involved in creating the pitch, it
would be surprising if they came up with something that didn’t work. If the
pitch fails, there are usually two root causes: either the sales team wasn’t
involved enough in the creation of the pitch, or the pitch doesn’t work
because the positioning is weak.
Fixing the first of those root causes is a matter of running the sales pitch
creation process again, with more involvement from salespeople who have
experience with customers in the early stages of deals. If the sales team is
already heavily involved in creating the pitch, then the culprit is weak
inputs to the pitch creation process. And if that is the case, the team will
need to go back and formally review their positioning

Who Owns the Sales Pitch?
I often get asked who should “own” the sales pitch after it is developed. I
believe in cross-functional teams to create positioning and the sales pitch,
but I do think it makes sense to designate someone to be responsible for
stewardship of positioning and the sales pitch. Because positioning and the
sales pitch are closely tied, ideally we have someone who is responsible for
both.
If a product marketing function exists in your company, this is the natural
place for the positioning and sales narrative to land. That person will be
responsible for documenting both positioning and the sales pitches, as well
as any approved assets that go with it, such as graphics or illustrations.

Common Mistakes



Insight That Isn’t Unique
Some companies will try to use a common industry trend as insight at the
start of their sales pitch, rather than the company’s unique insight into the
market. For example, I have seen variations of “Companies are generating
more data than ever before,” or “The pace of AI adoption is accelerating,”
or “Companies need to digitally transform their businesses.” All of these are
obvious trends in the market. The key to Step 1, Insight, is to go beyond
these surface-level observations and get down to the insight that makes your
solution uniquely valuable. Your insight should be unique and differentiated
because you need it to set up the reasoning behind why your unique,
differentiated value is important.

A Lack of Discovery
Experienced sales reps will naturally see Step 2, Alternatives, as a place to
do discovery. Less-experienced reps may fall into a trap of talking at a
prospect, rather than taking the time to ask questions to make sure their
characterization of the market is resonating with the prospect and that they
are getting what they need to fully understand the prospect’s situation. That
doesn’t necessarily mean you need to spend a long time on this step—it will
depend on how many alternative approaches you want to cover and the
complexity of their pros and cons. The key in this step is to make sure the
prospect sees their current situation and choices in the picture you paint of
the market before you move on.

Spending Too Much Time on the Setup Phase
One of the most common mistakes companies make with this format is
spending too much time on the setup phase. The first call with a prospect
can last anywhere from thirty minutes to an hour. Most companies can get
through the setup part of the pitch in a few minutes, depending on how
active the discussion with the prospect is. I’ve seen companies do the setup
in as little as ninety seconds, but others that need up to ten minutes.
The setup is important, and you should never skip it. But you need to spend
the bulk of your time ensuring that the prospect grasps your differentiated
value. The setup provides important context so your prospect understands
the importance of that value, but don’t forget that your value is the meat of
that first call.
Weak or Undifferentiated Value Themes
Your positioning is the fundamental input to the sales pitch. Weak
positioning leads to a weak insight statement and will result in an
ineffective story about how you are differentiated from the alternatives.
Your Differentiated Value step is the most important input to the pitch
because this is where you articulate what your solution can do for prospects
that no alternative solution can deliver. If that value is weak or not very
differentiated, then the pitch will not be compelling and is unlikely to work.

“The customer’s
perception is
your reality.”
Kate Zabriskie

Proof That Doesn’t Match the Prospect’s Situation
In Step 6, Proof, some companies default to sharing a case study, and often
use the same case study for every prospect. If your prospects are similar,
this might be fine. But ideally you want your proof to connect to both the
value themes you’ve covered and the individual prospect’s situation.
Wherever possible, you want to have proof that matches the prospect. For
example, if you are using a case study, it should reflect a similar industry or
show a similar use case, such as moving from the same status quo solution.
An Ask That’s Too Complicated
Buyers don’t necessarily know how to evaluate and purchase solutions. So,
it’s your job to make sure that the ask is straightforward and doesn’t cause
the prospect to second-guess whether they should accept your
recommendation for how to move ahead. The Ask step should move the
deal forward (assuming the prospect is a good fit for your solution) by
giving the prospect a next step that is easy to say yes to.


Using Your
Sales Pitch
Story beyond
Sales Calls

In particular, once the pitch is developed, it will become a key input to your
company’s marketing messaging and can be used either directly or
indirectly in different types of marketing content. A sales pitch that is built
through this methodology uses your positioning as a foundation. Therefore,
it has the same core differentiated value, which you determine as part of
your positioning, at the core of your marketing messaging. Building a sales
pitch in this manner ensures that the story you are telling in marketing is
aligned with the story you are telling in sales.

The Buyer’s Guide
One of my favorite categories of marketing content is the buyer’s guide. As
I told you at the beginning of this book, many prospects have never
purchased a product like yours before. They are desperate for information
that can help them make choices they feel comfortable with and can also
defend to their boss and other stakeholders. A buyer’s guide is a great way
to walk prospects though what you believe a knowledgeable buyer should
consider. It is also a great piece of lead generation content—a prospect’s
interest in a buyer’s guide is a strong signal that they are currently shopping
for software in your space.

I’ve created dozens of buyer’s guides, and each one has included pieces that
came from my sales pitch. A good guide gives buyers a way to think about
purchase criteria. It may include checklists of features that a buyer should
look for, but more importantly, it helps buyers understand when and why
they should be looking for those features. The insight from your sales pitch
(Step 1) is often a good starting point for a buyer’s guide because it helps
customers understand what’s important. The buyer’s guide can educate
customers on how certain important features map to value and give them a
way to determine whether that value is important to their business. Using
the Alternatives step in the sales pitch, you can then build categorized
value/feature checklists with commentary suggesting which customers
should include what features in their purchase criteria.

“A well-told story is
a gift to the reader/
listener/viewer because
it teaches them how
to confront their own
discomforts.”
Shawn Coyne
Visual Elements
Most companies could and should take advantage of representing their
company or product using a well-thought-out graphic. There are a few
different graphics you can use to communicate your differentiation and
position in the market. Here are a few examples:
•
The product suite
•
The company portfolio
•
The “how we fit into your current infrastructure” illustration
•
The workflow graphic, which shows how a particular use case or workflow
gets done. The goal is to highlight a specific value point, such as “saves
time” or “eliminates manual processes.”
A visual can do a lot to position your offering and tell a story about how
you are different from your competitors. You can find some examples in the
downloadable materials available at aprildunford.com/books.

The Conference Talk
I’ve worked with a number of founders who regularly speak at conferences.
While I don’t believe it is appropriate to do a sales pitch as a conference
talk, there are components of the pitch that are perfectly suited to a
conference talk. The setup phase of the sales pitch is centered on your
insight into the market. That insight is often a great topic for a conference
talk. It gives the speaker a chance to expose their thinking about the market
while providing valuable information and insights to the audience. Pay
attention to the start-up CEOs you see speaking at conferences—many of
them are speaking about what they have learned about the space they are in
and how they formed a unique point of view on the market.

Research, White Papers,
and Other Content
Similar to the conference talk, some companies will sponsor or conduct
research that explores the themes of their market insight, and then distribute
the results of that research in a white paper or other marketing content.
Many companies will publish yearly research that tracks trends and the
adoption of solutions in the market. All of this should be aligned with and
could even feed into the Insight step of your sales pitch. Results and
conclusions from this type of research are often easily repurposed into blog
posts, social media content, and other materials.

Conclusion
Selling is incredibly hard. Good salespeople will spend years developing
their skills, and some of them will never master them. However, building
a good sales pitch doesn’t need to be difficult. If you stay focused on
helping the buyer make a confident decision, you will end up with a
pitch that works.
Here are a few key takeaways I’d like to leave you with:
1
Buying is hard. Do not underestimate how difficult making a purchase
decision can be for your prospects.
2
“Do nothing” is the most fearsome competitor you have. If customers cannot
figure out how to confidently make a purchase decision, they simply won’t
make one.
3
A sales pitch is special. Companies tell different stories for different
audiences and for different purposes. A sales pitch is a unique style of story
designed to guide the customer to a place where they can say yes with
confi 4
A great sales pitch starts with your company’s unique insight into the
market. Sales pitches that start with generic problems or trends will not lead
prospects to your unique differentiated value.
5
Help customers understand their options and they will be better informed to
make decisions confidently. You don’t need to bash the competition to do
this.
6
Differentiated value is the star of the show. Customers don’t care about
features. They care about what those features can do for their business.dence.

